Blog: keycloak (#122)
JankariTech/blog: src/assets/Keycloak/Keycloak.md

---
title: Introduction to Keycloak
authorName: Amrita Shrestha
authorAvatar: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/54478846?s=100&v=4
authorLink: https://github.com/amrita-shrestha
createdAt: May 14, 2024

> tags: Keycloak, Identity Access Management

Author: our previous blog does something similar so I did

> tags: Keycloak, Identity Access Management

Reviewer: same as https://github.com/JankariTech/blog/pull/122#discussion_r1620186745
anyway, if it worked having tags with empty spaces in a previous blog post (I haven't seen any examples), then ignore this

---

## Keycloak
[Keycloak](https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak) is an open-source project created by RedHat for Single Sign-On. It provides an `Identity and Access Management` (IAM) solution designed to secure application services.
Additionally, it enables users to authenticate through various identity providers and use fine-grained permissions for regulating access to Software as a Service (SaaS) applications.

It facilitates the creation of a user database with customizable roles and groups, offering functionalities such as user management, registration, and password policy enforcement.
This makes it a comprehensive Identity and Access Management solution for contemporary applications. Keycloak API enables the integration of all these features into your application
without the need for additional coding.

## Keycloak Features
![Keycloak features](/src/assets/Keycloak/images/Keycloak/Keycloak-features.png)

1. Identity Broker:
   Identity Broker acts as a middleman, linking various service providers with different identity providers. It establishes trust with external identity providers to utilize their identities for accessing internal services offered by service providers.

>    Imagine a textile company, which has two Keycloak setups: one for customer and another for internal employees. If you want your employees to access external services without creating new accounts on customer Keycloak, you can use the customer Keycloak

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Imagine a textile company, which has two Keycloak setups: one for customers and another for internal employees. If you want your employees to access external services without creating new accounts on the customer Keycloak, you can use the customer Keycloak
```

Author: It's a general example, do we need to go that deep? Blog is about Keycloak so may be avoiding non-IT related thing will be good otherwise blog will be full of less useful information

Reviewer: If it's a general example, then why specifying that this is a textile company... I think this just adds confusion to the reader

   as `Broker` and the internal Keycloak as `Provider` in this scenario.

2. User Federation:
   Keycloak provides the ability to integrate with existing LDAP or Active Directory servers. It also supports implementation of your own provider such as a relational database.

3. Standard Protocols:
   Keycloak is based on three standard protocols i.e., OpenID Connect, OAuth2.0, and SAML.

4. Password Policies:
   Keycloak contains different password policies i.e., HashAlgorithm, Hashing Iterations, Digits, Lowercase Characters, Regular Expression and so on.

5. Single Sign-On:
   Keycloak facilitates a seamless login experience where users only need to sign in once to access multiple applications, eliminating the need for repeated logins.

>    This not only streamlines user experience but also simplifies identity management for administrators.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   This not only streamlines the user experience but also simplifies identity management for administrators.
```

6. Social Login:
   Keycloak has built-in support to login via Google, GitHub, and Facebook, which helps us to use social identity providers.

## Keycloak Drawbacks
Despite its extensive features, Keycloak does have certain limitations. One of these is the need for a more varied implementation approach.
Additionally, the following are some of the drawbacks associated with Keycloak:
1. Complex Server Deployment: The manual process involved in deploying Keycloak on a server can be complicated, potentially affecting overall productivity.
2. Lack of Comprehensive Support Documentation: Despite its robust functionalities, Keycloak could benefit from more efficient and extensive support documentation. This would make it easier for users to find suitable solutions to their problems.

> 

Reviewer: Usually the negative points are mentioned towards the end of a blog post. It makes sense though to mention them here before going into the details of installation. However for the flow of the text it might help to add one sentence to transition to the next paragraph. Something along the lines that it is not the perfect solution for every situation, but still recommended for many scenarios and encouraging readers to learn more about how to install and use it for their projects...

Author: Upto my knowledge step depends upon services integrating with Keycloak. oCIS, Github, Nextcloud has separate step.

Author: I think the order will be good enough for this blog. Next time while I target academic people, I surely remember this to make my transition fluent.

## Keycloak Installation

> ### By Docker image

Reviewer: use the same styles for all titles, either all words starting with capital letters or just the first word (and names or other words that normally are written with capital letters)

Author: Didn't I follow the same naming rule? Sry can't get what you mean ?

Reviewer: In English usually all words of a sentence are written with small letters, just the first word and names are written with capitals. Some people use capitals for all words in titles, the style you applied in line 49. In line 50 however, you only used capital for "By" (first word of the line) and "Docker" (name), but not "image"... 
Same applies to some other titles throughout the blog post. It's up to you to choose which style you prefer, but use the same title style for all your titles :)

> Before we start, lets make sure following things get installed into your system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before we start, lets make sure following things are installed on your system.
```

- install [Docker Engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/)
- install [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/)

> 

Reviewer: For me as a reader it is still not clear if 1. and 2. are sequences of consecutive steps or two alternative ways of running Keycloak ("Keycloak using XYZ" gives the impression that these are different approaches but numeration makes me think these are steps that should be reproduced). Maybe an introductory sentence or more precise wording for the steps might help to understand this better.

Reviewer: unresolving this comment because it is still confusing to me. Maybe I didn't manage to explain the point that is confusing to me well enough. Happy to have a chat.

1. Keycloak using docker image
Run the following docker command to serve the Keycloak image. Keycloak will be available on `http://localhost:8080.
```bash
docker run -p 8080:8080 -e KEYCLOAK_ADMIN=admin -e KEYCLOAK_ADMIN_PASSWORD=admin quay.io/keycloak/keycloak:24.0.2 start-dev
 ```

> 2. Keycloak with postgres database using docker-compose

Author: sorry but i want to make it short as much as possible. Detail can be next blog idea

> 2. Keycloak with postgres database using docker-compose

Reviewer: Thanks for adding the introductory sentence, I think it's much clearer now for the reader.

```
services:
  postgres:
    image: postgres:alpine
    volumes:
      - postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data
    environment:
      POSTGRES_DB: keycloak
      POSTGRES_USER: keycloak
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: keycloak

  keycloak:
    image: quay.io/keycloak/keycloak:24.0.1
    command: ["start-dev"]
    environment:
      KC_DB: postgres
      KC_DB_URL: "jdbc:postgresql://postgres:5432/keycloak"
      KC_DB_USERNAME: keycloak
      KC_DB_PASSWORD: keycloak
      KC_FEATURES: impersonation
      KEYCLOAK_ADMIN: admin
      KEYCLOAK_ADMIN_PASSWORD: admin
    ports:
      - 8001:8080 # map keycloak port 8080 to 8001
    depends_on:
      - postgres

volumes:
  postgres_data:
```

Save above code in `compose.yaml` file and run `docker compose up` in terminal.

> Docker compose serves Keycloak on `http://localhost:8001`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Docker compose serves Keycloak on `http://localhost:8001`.
```

Reviewer: In English, there should be a point at the end of each full sentence. If you think it's confusing because this is a URL, then at least apply the same writing style to the whole blog post, for example line 56...

### By distribution file

> There is another to set up keycloak using keycloak distribution file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is another way to set up keycloak using the keycloak distribution file.
```

Reviewer: you've previously written Keycloak with captial K which sounds right if it's considered to be a name. Be consistent throughout your text in how you write some of the key terms.

1. Download the keycloak distribution
    ```
    export KC_VERSION=24.0.4
    curl -LO  https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/releases/download/"${KC_VERSION}"/keycloak-"${KC_VERSION}".zip
    ```

2. Unzip the keycloak distribution package
    ```
    unzip keycloak-${KC_VERSION}.zip
    ```

3. Install openjdk
    ```
    sudo apt install openjdk-17-jdk
    ```

> 4. Navigate to Keycloak directory

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Navigate to the Keycloak directory
```

    ```
    cd keycloak-${KC_VERSION}
   ```

5. When we start the server for the first time, we have to set the admin user and the admin password:
    ```
   KEYCLOAK_ADMIN=admin KEYCLOAK_ADMIN_PASSWORD=admin ./bin/kc.sh start-dev
   ```

>     > Note: if port 8080 is already used then you can map keycloak port using Keycloak environment variable 'KC_HTTP_PORT=8001'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    > Note: if port 8080 is already used then you can map the Keycloak port using the Keycloak environment variable 'KC_HTTP_PORT=8001'
```

> 6. When we start again, it is not necessary to set these variables, again. You can start the server with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. When we start again, it is not necessary to set these variables again. You can start the server with:
```

    ```
   ./bin/kc.sh start-dev
   ```

>    > Note: start-dev runs the quarkus application in DEV-mode. Do not use this for Production.

Reviewer 2: What is "quarkus"?
When reading this note, I have no idea what it has to do with Keycloak.

>    > Note: start-dev runs the quarkus application in DEV-mode. Do not use this for Production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > Note: start-dev runs the quarkus application in DEV-mode. Do not use this for production.
```

> By default, the Keycloak server on port 8080 for http and 8084 for https. They are only served from the localhost loopback address 127.0.0.1:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, the Keycloak server is on port 8080 for http and 8084 for https. They are only served from the localhost loopback address 127.0.0.1:
```

Keycloak serves on `http://localhost:<port>`

## Why Keycloak Matters?
1. Keycloak is open source.
2. Keycloak supports three different authentication protocols which gives you the possibility to cover many applications with different security demands with a single tool.

> 3. Keycloak provides web-based GUI which makes any configurations changes easy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Keycloak provides a web-based GUI which makes any configurations changes easy.
```

---
title: Introduction to Keycloak
authorName: Amrita Shrestha
authorAvatar: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/54478846?s=100&v=4
authorLink: https://github.com/amrita-shrestha
createdAt: May 31, 2024
tags: Keycloak, IAM
banner: https://blog.jankaritech.com/src/assets/Keycloak/images/Keycloak/Keycloak.png
---

[Keycloak](https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak) is an open-source project created by RedHat for Single Sign-On. It provides an `Identity and Access Management` (IAM) solution designed to secure application services.
Additionally, it enables users to authenticate through various identity providers and use fine-grained permissions for regulating access to Software as a Service (SaaS) applications.

It facilitates the creation of a user database with customizable roles and groups, offering functionalities such as user management, registration, and password policy enforcement.

> This makes it a comprehensive Identity and Access Management solution for contemporary applications. Keycloak API enables the integration of all these features into your application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This makes it a comprehensive Identity and Access Management solution for contemporary applications. The Keycloak API enables the integration of all these features into your application
```

2. User Federation:
   Keycloak provides the ability to integrate with existing LDAP or Active Directory servers. It also supports implementation of your own provider such as a relational database.

3. Standard Protocols:
   Keycloak is based on three standard protocols i.e., OpenID Connect, OAuth2.0, and SAML.

4. Password Policies:
   Keycloak contains different password policies i.e., HashAlgorithm, Hashing Iterations, Digits, Lowercase Characters, Regular Expression and so on.

5. Single Sign-On:
   Keycloak facilitates a seamless login experience where users only need to sign in once to access multiple applications, eliminating the need for repeated logins.
   This not only streamlines the user experience but also simplifies identity management for administrators.

6. Social Login:
   Keycloak has built-in support to login via Google, GitHub, and Facebook, which helps us to use social identity providers.

## Keycloak Installation
### By Docker
Make sure [Docker Engine](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) and [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/) has been installed in your system.

> Two different way are available to install Keycloak using docker as mentioned below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two different ways are available to install Keycloak using docker as mentioned below.
```

    ```
    export KC_VERSION=24.0.4
    curl -LO  https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/releases/download/"${KC_VERSION}"/keycloak-"${KC_VERSION}".zip
    ```

2. Unzip the Keycloak distribution package
    ```
    unzip keycloak-${KC_VERSION}.zip
    ```

3. Install openjdk
    ```
    sudo apt install openjdk-17-jdk
    ```

4. Navigate to the Keycloak directory
    ```
    cd keycloak-${KC_VERSION}
   ```

5. When we start the server for the first time, we have to set the admin user and the admin password:
    ```
   KEYCLOAK_ADMIN=admin KEYCLOAK_ADMIN_PASSWORD=admin ./bin/kc.sh start-dev
   ```
    > Note: if port 8080 is already used, then you can map the Keycloak port using the Keycloak environment variable 'KC_HTTP_PORT=8001'

6. When we start again, it is not necessary to set these variables again. You can start the server with:
    ```
   ./bin/kc.sh start-dev
   ```
   > Note: start-dev runs the Keycloak application in DEV-mode. Do not use this for production.

By default, the Keycloak server is on port 8080 for http and 8084 for https. They are only served from the localhost loopback address 127.0.0.1:
Keycloak serves on `http://localhost:<port>`.

> ## Why Keycloak Matters?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Why Keycloak Matters
```

A phrase like this is a "statement" and not actually a question, even though it starts with "Why"

1. Keycloak is open source.
2. Keycloak supports three different authentication protocols which gives you the possibility to cover many applications with different security demands with a single tool.

> 3. Keycloak provides a web-based GUI which makes any configurations changes easy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Keycloak provides a web-based GUI which makes any configuration changes easy.
```

4. Keycloak has huge [community support](https://www.keycloak.org/community).

## Keycloak Drawbacks
Despite its extensive features, Keycloak does have certain limitations. One of these is the need for a more varied implementation approach.
Additionally, the following are some of the drawbacks associated with Keycloak:
1. Complex Server Deployment:
   The manual process involved in deploying Keycloak on a server can be complicated, potentially affecting overall productivity.

2. Lack of Comprehensive Support Documentation:
   Despite its robust functionalities, Keycloak could benefit from more efficient and extensive support documentation. This would make it easier for users to find suitable solutions to their problems.

> ## When It May Not Be the Best Choice?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## When It May Not Be the Best Choice
```

similar here - this is a "statement" heading, not a question, even though it starts with "When"
